.if n .ds Q \&"
.if t .ds Q ``
.if n .ds U \&"
.if t .ds U ''
.TH format 1 
.tr \&
.nr bi 0
.nr ll 0
.nr el 0
.de Pp
.ie \\n(ll>0 \{\
.ie \\n(bi=1 \{\
.nr bi 0
.if \\n(t\\n(ll=0 \{.IP \\(bu\}
.if \\n(t\\n(ll=1 \{.IP \\n+(e\\n(el.\}
.\}
.el .sp 
.\}
.el \{\
.ie \\nh=1 \{\
.LP
.nr h 0
.\}
.el .PP 
.\}
..
.SH NAME
format -- translate SGML into LaTeX or nroff/troff

.Pp
.SH SYNOPSIS

.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
format [-c] [-t int] [-T format] [-r mapping] file[.sgml]
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.SH DESCRIPTION

.Pp
\f(CRformat\fP translates an SGML file of the \f(CRqwertz\fP
document type into LaTeX and various forms of \f(CRnroff/troff\fP.  The
\*Q.sgml\*U file name extension is optional. It first checks that the file
is a syntactically correct instance of the \f(CRqwertz\fP document type.
The default action is to write LaTeX to the standard output.  To
print a \f(CRqwertz\fP file named \f(CRfoo.sgml\fP, using LaTeX, just type
.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
format foo | qtex | lpr
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
\f(CRqtex\fP is a front-end to LaTeX designed to be used as a filter
in this way.  See \f(CRqtex(1)\fP for more information.
.Pp
If you need more control over printing than is available using
\f(CRlpr\fP alone, you can first create a \f(CRdvi\fP file, and then
print the file using a \f(CRdvi\fP to PostScript converter, such as
\f(CRdvips\fP.  For example, to print pages 3 to 10 of \f(CRfoo\fP, you
could type
.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
format foo | qtex -d > foo.dvi
dvips -p 3 -n 8 foo | lpr
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
If there is a PostScript previewer available, such as
\f(CRghostview\fP, from the GNU distribution, you can preview the
document by typing
.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
format foo | qtex > foo.ps; ghostview foo.ps
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
Or, you may also preview the document using a \f(CRdvi\fP previewer
such as \f(CRxdvi\fP by typing
.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
format foo | qtex -d > foo.dvi;  xdvi foo
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
You can also use \f(CRnroff\fP to view the document on an ASCII
terminal:
.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
format -T nroff foo | nroff -ms | more
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
Finally, \f(CRnroff\fP may also be suitable for sending the document to
someone by electronic mail:
.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
format -T nroff foo | nroff -ms | mail thomas@gmdzi.gmd.de
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.SH OPTIONS

.Pp
In the following, it is assumed that the file to be formatted is
named \f(CRfoo.sgml\fP, or simply \f(CRfoo\fP.
.Pp
.RS
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.IP "\f(CR-help\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
If this is the only option, a short message listing all the
options available, and their purpose, is printed to the standard out.
.Pp
.IP "\f(CR-c\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Just \fIcheck\fP the syntax of the document, to see that it is a
correct instance of the \f(CRqwertz\fP document type.
.Pp
.IP "\f(CR-T [latex | nroff | grops | man]\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Use \f(CR-T\fP to select the format in which to translate the
\f(CRqwertz\fP document.  By default, LaTeX is used.  \f(CRnroff\fP is
appropriate for ASCII devices.  \f(CRgrops\fP is a \f(CRtroff\fP format for
\f(CRgroff\fP, a reconstruction of \f(CRtroff\fP from the Free Software
Foundation.  \f(CRgrops\fP uses \f(CRgroff's\fP names for non-ASCII
characters and symbols.  To use \f(CRgroff\fP to generate an ASCII
version of the document, use the \f(CRnroff\fP format, as in:
.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
format -T nroff foo | groff -ms -T ascii | more 
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
Both the \f(CRgrops\fP and \f(CRnroff\fP formats use the \f(CRms\fP macro
package. Also, documents containing tables and formulas will need to
be preprocesed by \f(CRtbl(1)\fP and \f(CReqn(1)\fP, respectively.
.Pp
The \f(CRman\fP format generates \f(CRnroff\fP using the \f(CRman\fP macro
package for Unix manual pages.   Manual pages may also be formatted
using any of the other formats.
.Pp
By default, \f(CRformat\fP looks in the \f(CR$FORMAT/rep\fP
directory for the files controlling the translation of \f(CRqwertz\fP
documents into various formats.  If you wish to customize the
appearance of your documents, or support additional formats, you may
create your own mappings.  Just set the \f(CRREPDIR\fP shell variable to
the directory containing your formats.  For each format, \f(CRf\fP, there
should be a subdirectory named \f(CRf\fP in the \f(CRREPDIR\fP directory.
Within this subdirectory, there must be three files, named:
\f(CRmapping\fP, \f(CRgeneral\fP and \f(CRmath\fP.  The \f(CRmapping\fP file is a
simple table from SGML start and end tags into instructions or
commands for the goal formatting system.  (The table must be in the
format first used by the Amsterdam SGML Parser.)
See \f(CR$FORMAT/rep/qwertz/latex/mapping\fP and
\f(CR$FORMAT/rep/qwertz/grops/mapping\fP for examples.  The
\f(CRgeneral\fP and \f(CRmath\fP files are SGML files containing the
formatter specific definitions of general purpose characters and
mathematical symbols, respectively.  Again, see the examples in
\f(CR$FORMAT/rep/qwertz/latex\fP.  See also the \f(CR-r\fP option, below.
.Pp
.IP "\f(CR-r\fP \fIreplacement file\fP"
.nr bi 1


The \f(CRREPDIR\fP shell variable is used to set the default
directory for complete replacement files.  The \f(CR-r\fP option is
used to override the replacements for some of the start and end
tags in a default replacement file.   Only the start or end tags
which are to be formatted differently than specified in the default
file need to be included.

.IP "\f(CR-t \fP\fIn\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
\f(CRformat\fP always pipes the input document through \f(CRexpand\fP
to replace tabs by spaces.  By default, each \fItab\fP is replaced by eight
spaces.  You can change this by using this option.
.Pp
.nr ll -1
.RE
.Pp
.SH SEE ALSO

.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
 
qtex(1), nroff(1), tbl(1), eqn(1), groff(1), dvips(1),
expand(1), sed(1), lpr(1), ghostview(1), xdvi(1) 
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.SH DIAGNOSTICS

.Pp
SGML syntax errors are reported to standard out.  Each error message
mentions the line number containing the error.
.Pp
