.if n .ds Q \&"
.if t .ds Q ``
.if n .ds U \&"
.if t .ds U ''
.TH qtex 1 
.tr \&
.nr bi 0
.nr ll 0
.nr el 0
.de Pp
.ie \\n(ll>0 \{\
.ie \\n(bi=1 \{\
.nr bi 0
.if \\n(t\\n(ll=0 \{.IP \\(bu\}
.if \\n(t\\n(ll=1 \{.IP \\n+(e\\n(el.\}
.\}
.el .sp 
.\}
.el \{\
.ie \\nh=1 \{\
.LP
.nr h 0
.\}
.el .PP 
.\}
..
.SH NAME
qtex -- translate a LaTeX file into PostScript

.Pp
.SH SYNOPSIS

.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
qtex [-dsxgbv] file[.tex] | lpr
cat file.tex | qtex [-dsxgbv] | lpr
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.SH DESCRIPTION

.Pp
\f(CRqtex\fP is a front-end to LaTeX, BibTeX and a \f(CRdvi\fP to
PostScript driver, which makes them considerably easier, and more
Unix-like, to use.  Unlike LaTeX, it can also process LaTeX files
read from the standard input file, or in a Unix pipe.  By default,
\f(CRqtex\fP writes PostScript to the standard output file, but there is
a command line switch, described below, for generating the usual TeX\f(CRdvi\fP file instead.   The \*Q.tex\*U file extension is optional.  If
LaTeX finds an error in your input file, a message will be printed to
the standard error file and execution is terminated, with a non-zero
exit status.   There will be a \*Q.log\*U file in the same directory as
the input file describing the errors.
.Pp
.SH OPTIONS

.Pp
.RS
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.IP "\f(CR-help\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
If this is the only option, a short message listing all the
options available, and their purpose, is printed to the standard out.
.Pp
.IP "\f(CR-d\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Create a TeX device-independent file, i.e. a \f(CRdvi\fP file,
instead of PostScript.  This is piped to the standard output
file.  To save the \f(CRdvi\fP file, write, for example:
.Pp
.sp 
.ft CR
.eo 
.nf
qtex -d foo > foo.dvi
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.IP "\f(CR-s\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
\fISave\fP all temporary files, such as \f(CRfoo.tex\fP,
\f(CRfoo.dvi\fP, and \f(CRfoo.aux\fP.   PostScript is generated and
written to standard out as usual.
.Pp
.IP "\f(CR-x\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Use this option if the input file contains \fIcross
references\fP.  This option causes the LaTeX file to be processed by
TeX twice, to resolve the references.
.Pp
.IP "\f(CR-g\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Use this option if the document is written in \fIGerman\fP.  It
causes TeX to use another algorithm for hyphenation.  Remember to
\fIalso\fP use the \f(CRgerman\fP option in the options list of the
document itself. 
.Pp
.IP "\f(CR-b\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Use this option if the file includes a list of references or
\fIbibliography\fP.  The option causes LaTeX, then BibTeX and then
LaTeX (twice) again to be run.   The bibliography referenced in the
document is expected to be a BibTeX \f(CRbib\fP file in the same
directory as the document.   If your bibliography is being
maintained in the \f(CRbiblio\fP SGML format, use the \f(CRbiblio\fP
command to first translate it into \f(CRbib\fP format.  The \f(CR-b\fP
option implies the \f(CR-x\fP option, for cross-references, described above.
.Pp
.IP "\f(CR-v\fP"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
\fIVerbose\fP mode.  If your document is particularly long, you
may want to use this mode to be kept posted about just what
\f(CRqtex\fP is doing at the moment.  The messages are written to
standard error, so that they are not mixed with the PostScript being
piped to the printer!
.nr ll -1
.RE
.Pp
